In this video, we're going to add a bit
more code to our simple jukebox program.
We've got it printing the menu of albums,
and now we need to add the menu of songs
for a chosen album. We won't finish the
program in this video, though.
That's because I want to use this code to talk
about constants in Python. I'll talk
about them in a moment. First though, let's tidy
up our code and add a bit more.
We don't need that second for loop, so I'm going
to remove that. So our menu should only
show the album name. At the moment,
we're printing all the details for an album,
which makes the menu a bit
cluttered. So let's remove the extra
placeholders on line 6, so that we've
only got a total of 2 there.
We're only going to output index + 1 plus title, so we're going to remove artist, year and songs
from line 7, like so.
Now that's shortened the line quite
considerably, and in fact, that'll fit
on a single line now, so let's go back
and do that, like so.
Alright, so let's run that just to make
sure that I haven't broken anything. It's
a good idea, actually, to run your program
often, when developing it. That way, if you
get an error, you only have to look at
the small amount of code that you've
just changed. If you type in thousands of
lines of code before running it, you could
have all sorts of bugs and it'll be very hard
to try and figure out where the problem is.
Alright, so you can see there when I ran
it, we get our albums menu printed out,
which is just what we wanted. Next what
we need to do, is get some input from the
user, then check that it's a valid choice.
So let's add some code for that.
So I'm gonna start down here on line 8. I'm
gonna type choice - and I'm indented to
the same level as the for loop -
choice equals int parentheses, and within
the parentheses, input left and right
parentheses. So obviously,
as always we've got our closing right
parenthesis. Then on line 9, I'm going to
type if 1 is less than equal to choice,
less then equal to len albums,
right parenthesis : On the next line, songs_ list
is equal to albums
left square brackets, and within the square
brackets, choice
- 1, then we've got our right
square bracket then the three in square
brackets, after that. Then on the next
line - line 11, indented to the same
level as the if, I'm going to type else :
then go down to line 12 and indent break
to the next level.
Alright, so on line 8, we get input
from the user and convert it into an
integer. Our program will crash if the
user types anything other than digits. As
I said, we'll be looking at how to deal with
that, later in the course. Line 9's
checking that the value they entered is
within the required range. Our valid choice
is from 1 to the length of the albums list.
We've got four albums, so any value
greater than four is invalid.
Zero is also invalid. If they enter an
invalid choice, we break out of the loop
via the else statement. Line 10 is
binding a variable called songs_list
to the list of songs for the
selected album. If you find yourself
struggling with nested indexing like this,
a good technique is to print the values out.
Let's do that. We're going to indent the code, starting on line 14, to the same level as the if.
So print parentheses albums,
then left and right square brackets and
within the square brackets, we're going
to type choice - 1, then we've got our
closing right square bracket and
right parenthesis. On the next line,
also indented at the same level, print
parentheses songs_list and
finally, line 16, print, and just a set of
parentheses to print an empty line.
Run the program, and what we might do just to see
this a little bit clearer, we're going to
change the View Mode again, as I've done
previously, to Window. So this time we're
going to select option 1,
Welcome to my Nightmare. We can see that
we've got our menu printing out. So
you can see, we've got the tuple for
album zero printed out on screen, there.
Choice is 1, and we're subtracting one
from that on line 14. Now on line
10, we bind songs_list to
the fourth item in the tuple. We're
using an index of 3 which gives us the
fourth item - that's the list of songs - and
that's what line 15 is printing out,
and we can see that showing
in the output pane. So choose some other
options, and make sure that you're happy
with how songs_list gets
the correct list of songs for each album,
before continuing. So pause the video and
come back when you've finished
experimenting. Alright, so before we write
the rest of the code, I want to talk
about constants in Python. Now this is
going to be quite a short program, but
often you'll be working with hundreds, or
even thousands of lines of program code.
With large programs, it can be very
difficult to remember what everything is.
So looking at line 10, for example, we
have to remember that the list of songs
is at index position 3, in albums.
That would be much easier if we gave 3 a
more meaningful name. We could call it
songs list. So let's go ahead and actually
do that, and exit out of our program.
Back up here, where the while loop
currently is, I'm going to type on line 3,
songs_list equals 3 - put an extra
blank line there. Now we can use the
variable, instead of remembering that we
want the value 3. The problem with that
is, the value must always be 3. It's a
constant that refers to the fourth item
in the list. If you go changing the
value that songs list is bound to, our code
won't do what we expect. We want
songs list to represent a constant value.
So looking at our code, we've reassigned songs_list on line 12.
That's not good and it will cause our code to break. So many languages
have some way of marking a value as
constant. The keyword const, c o n s t,
is used in C, for example. In Java, the
keyword is final.
Python, on the other hand, doesn't have
any way of preventing us from changing
the value of a constant. Instead, there's
a convention that constants should have
names that are in all capitals. So let's go
ahead and make a change here, on line 3,
and make it SONGS_LIST in
uppercase, as you can see there, leaving
it still to the value of 3. Whenever you
see a name that's all in capitals, that
means it represents a constant and you
shouldn't change it. Now you'll find that
convention is in the Python Style sheet,
which I'll quickly open up now.
The link, as always, is in the resources section. Note that this is only a convention, though.
The Python compiler won't stop
you reassigning a constant -
it's ultimately your responsibility to make
sure that you don't do that.
Python 3.8 adds a Final annotation, and
a final qualifier to the typing module.
However, the compiler still doesn't
prevent you from changing the value of a
constant, so pay attention to this
convention. Use uppercase for the names
of your constants, and don't change any
variable that's in uppercase. Alright, so
back to the code. We can now use our
constant on line 12, in place of the value 3.
I'm gonna do just that:
SONGS_LIST, as you can see there,
Because variable names are case
sensitive, SONGS_LIST in
square brackets at the end of that line,
represents a different value to songs_list
at the start, which isn't
in uppercase. If you want to be even
clearer, you could come up here and
refactor this. Let's go ahead and do that:
Refactor, Rename, and we'll charge it from
SONGS_LIST to SONGS_LIST_INDEX,
and you can see the change has been reflected
on line 12, as well as line 3. That's a good
idea - now the name more accurately
reflects what the constant's for.
So that's constants in Python.
There's nothing special about them - they're just
variables. The compiler doesn't treat
them any differently, to any other
variable. We write them in capitals to
let other humans know, that they
represent a value that shouldn't be changed.
Alright, so in the next video, we'll
finish the code for our jukebox menu.
See you in the next video.